---
layout: post
title: The Ghost Town of Pryp’yat’. When a Peaceful Atom Turns Life into a Nightmare
author: Alex Yemelianenko
date: Jul 3 2021 12:51
---

> *When the atomic bomb drops, day turns into night, people become
> ghosts.* (Sakamoto Hatsumi, 1952)[^1]

This essay is about a unique town with extraordinary but short and
bitter history. I believe that the town is exceptional not just for the
whole former Soviet society but perhaps even on the global scale. This
town had a short and infamous history; however, it is well known in the
world of nuclear scientists; and now it serves as an attraction for
tourists from all over the world. The town I am going to write about is
the Soviet *atomgrad* named Pryp'yat' (Ukrainian spelling - *Прип'ять*);
which once was a young locality in northern Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic. Pryp'yat' was one of many socialist towns of the Soviet Union,
inhabitants of which enjoyed a prosperous socialist life. This lasted
until the devastating technological disaster of the April 26, 1986,
which had a catastrophic impact on the course of the town's history.
Nonetheless, this event also brought Pryp'yat' its global fame.

The essay will be divided into three main but short sections: the first
part of my work will be devoted to the founding of the town in 1970 and
its subsequent development; the second section will be about the impact
of the 1986 Chornobyl catastrophe on Pryp'pyat' and its population. The
third part will be about the post-catastrophe period when the entire
town's made a try to move into a new place, a town of Slavutych; about
the post-Soviet period of Pryp'yat', which eventually became a ghost
town, and an attraction for tourists and so-called *stalkers*. In my
work, I am going to utilize primary and secondary sources of different
historical periods in three languages: English, Ukrainian, and Russian.
In my essay, I will apply visual materials about the town from my
personal photo archive, as well as from magazine articles and online
sources.

Thus my essay will be devoted to the unique monotown of Pryp'yat', to
its short lifetime. How once the blossoming standardized socialist
locality turned into a ghost town and attraction for tourists and
scientists from all over the world. Nonetheless, I believe that my work
might be interesting for a broad global audience because it may simply
be unfamiliar with the town and its history.

**Planning, Construction, and Blossoming of the Atomograd Pryp'yat'**

A locality of Pryp'yat' was founded on February 4, 1970,[^2] as a future
place of residence for employees of a new, one of the largest nuclear
power plants in Europe, known to the world under the name of Chornobyl,
which Soviet authorities began to build simultaneously with the
settlement. Yes, it is not a mistake \-- from its founding, Pryp'yat'
was just a settlement for the nuclear power plant builders. Only a
decade later status of a town was granted to Pryp'yat' by authorities of
the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic[^3], thus further in the essay,
I am to call Pryp'yat' a town, just for convenience.

<p align="center">
<img src="/images/alex/image1.jpg" alt="drawing" style="width:150px; text-align:center;"/>
</p>

<p align="center">
<i>Source: Припять – город призрак.</i>
</p>

Geographically, the town is located in the north of the Kyiv region of
then-time Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, now independent Ukraine.
Pryp'yat' stands only about 100 kilometers from the capital city of
contemporary Ukraine, Kyiv, and just a few kilometers from the border
with Belarus. The reason for the town construction precisely on the spot
was logical as the site already had convenient railway and waterway
connections. The town actually was named after a local hydronym -- the river Pryp'yat' and became the ninth
*atomograd* (*atomograd* - a town-satellite for only one large
enterprise, a nuclear power plant) in the Soviet Union.

<p align="center">
<img src="/images/alex/image2.jpg" alt="drawing" style="width:300px; text-align:center;"/>
</p>

<p align="center">
<i>Source: Припять – город призрак.</i>
</p>


However, an important question arises about the town's founding: who and
why came up with an idea to construct a huge nuclear power plant just a
hundred kilometres away from a major urban centre with a population of
about three million people?

Nonetheless, all aspects of the town design, including its location,
number of dwellers and further development of the town, were planned
from scratch by Research Institute *Gidroproekt* under control of the
General Directorate of Research and Design Organizations of the Soviet
Union's Ministry of Energy and Electrification. The plan was titled
"Chernobyl Nuclear Power Plant; Housing, Cultural and Domestic
Construction; the General Plan of the Settlement"[^4] (hereinafter --
The Plan).


According to the Plan, all three stages of the town construction were
determined by the construction phases of the Chornobyl nuclear power
plant. The first phase of the town's construction had to cover the
building of residential houses and recreational facilities for the
population of 11,600 people with a living space of 80 thousand square
meters; the housing of the first stage was designated for the nuclear
power plant construction workers. According to the Plan, at this stage
of construction, the rate of living space was determined as 7 square
meters per person. The first buildings to erect in Prip'yat' were
dormitory No. 1, canteen No. 1 and the construction management building,
and the first street on which houses were located was Druzhby Narodov
Street[^5]. The construction of the first stage was carried out by
improved types of five, nine, and 12-floor panel houses of the frame
constructions, but other common buildings were constructed only due to
individual projects[^6]. According to the Plan, the construction stages
were clearly determined and justified. As for any other newly
constructed Soviet locality, in construction of Pryp'yat', the Plan
utilized an idea of creating microdistricts or *microrayons* with clear
functional zoning and transportation interchanges. Some scholars even
argue that for the first time in the entire Soviet Union, the
construction Plan for Pryp'yat' even provided a network of bike paths in
the town.[^7]

<p align="center">
<img src="/images/alex/image3.jpg" alt="drawing" style="width:400px; text-align:center;"/>
</p>

<p align="center">
<i>Source: The truth about Chernobyl? I saw it with my own eyes.</i>
</p>

The second stage of the town construction ought to begin in 1980 and was
also associated with the commissioning of the nuclear power plant's
additional capacity of 4 million kilowatts.[^8] The second phase of the
town's construction had to cover the building of residential houses and
recreational facilities for the population of 17,300 employees with a
living space of 130 thousand square meters. The residences of the second
stage were mainly designated for the nuclear power plant construction
workers but also for service staff of the plant, tallying to about 1,700
people. According to the Plan, at this stage of construction, the rate
of living space was determined as nine square meters per person.

The third phase of the town construction
was planned to be carried out from 1985 to 1990, simultaneously with the
completion of the nuclear power plant construction and its launch at
full capacity. The living space norm was determined at the rate of 12
square meters per person at the final stage of construction, and it was
envisaged to increase the total population by 18 thousand people and the
required housing stock by 214.3 thousand square meters[^9]. However,
because of the technogenic disaster -- the explosion of reactor No. 4 of
the Chernobyl nuclear power plant on Saturday, April 26, 1986, the
development of the town was frozen, and the final countdown of the life
cycle of Pryp'yat' began.

By the date of the disaster, the town's population was over 49 thousand
people; Pryp'yat' had five *microrayons* and a quarter with dormitories,
one hospital, park zones, fifteen kindergartens, five secondary schools,
three indoor swimming pools, two stadiums etc. The 6th *microrayon* was
never completed.[^10] On April 26, 1986, the town was covered with heavy
radioactive emissions and combustion products from the fire at the
Chernobyl nuclear power plant.

**The Chernobyl nuclear power plant catastrophe and eviction of the
Pryp'yat'.**

After the explosion, vast areas of the three neighbouring Soviet
Socialist Republics: Ukrainian, Belarussian and Russian, were
contaminated with radioactive emissions, and of course, the town of
Pryp'yat', the nearest settlement to the nuclear power plant**,** was
probably the first locality to suffer the most devastating impact of the
blowout and emissions.

<p align="center">
<img src="/images/alex/image4.jpg" alt="drawing" style="width:600px; text-align:center;"/>
</p>

<p align="center">
<i>Source: Euronews (April 26, 2016)</i>
</p>

On the morning of April 26, 1986, already after the explosion, pupils
still went to schools, albeit for the last time in the town. The whole
day after the explosion, on April 27, 1986, the Soviet authorities
decided to evacuate the entire population of Pryp'yat'. A corresponding
announcement about the decision was made through the local radio
broadcasting:

> "Attention, dear comrades! The City Council of People's Deputies reports
that due to the accident at the Chernobyl nuclear power plant, an
unfavourable radiation situation is developing in the city of Pripyat.
The necessary measures are being taken by party and Soviet bodies and
military units. However, in order to ensure the complete safety of
people and, first of all, children, it becomes necessary to temporarily
evacuate city residents to the nearest settlements of the Kiev region.
For this purpose, buses, accompanied by police officers and
representatives of the city executive committee, will be delivered to
each residential building today, on April 27, starting at fourteen
zero-zero hours. It is recommended to take documents with you, extremely
necessary things, and food in the first case. The heads of enterprises
and institutions have determined a circle of workers who remain in place
to ensure the normal functioning of the city's enterprises. All
residential buildings will be guarded by police officers during the
evacuation period. Comrades, while temporarily leaving your home, please
do not forget to close the windows, turn off electrical and gas
appliances, and turn off the water taps. Please be calm, orderly and
orderly during the temporary evacuation."[^11]

During May 1986, about 116 thousand people from 188 settlements were
evacuated from the 30-kilometer exclusion zone around the Chernobyl
nuclear power plant.[^12] The evacuated population was convinced, that
they leave their houses temporarily, but it turned out, that the
residencies were abandoned forever. The entire area of approximately
2,600 square kilometres around the nuclear power plant has become a
restricted area, which is now known to the world as the Chernobyl
Exclusion Zone, or simply the 30 Kilometer Zone. Most of the people were
moved to the neighboring and clean districts of the Kyiv region:
Zgurovsky, Makarovsky, Vasilkovsky, Yagotinsky and others. As the
remaining reactors of the Chernobyl nuclear power plant continued to
function, for the employees and their families the Soviet authorities at
the end of 1986 began to build a new and the youngest city of Ukraine --
Slavutych, just fifty kilometres away from the plant and peoples' former
place of residence. The construction was completed in short time, and
the first residents moved into their apartments already in
1987-1988.[^13]

<p align="center">
<img src="/images/alex/image5.jpg" alt="drawing" style="width:400px; text-align:center;"/>
</p>

<p align="center">
<i>Source: https://www.facebook.com/GorodSlavutich</i>
</p>

![](alex/image6.jpg")The name of the town of Slavutych was
taken from the ancient Ukrainian name of the Dnipro river. The town was
planned by thirty-five design institutions from eight Soviet republics;
each republic had to supply the construction site with labour and raw
materials. Slavutych was divided into quarters named after each capital
of the republics involved in their construction; thus, each quarter
inherited national flavour of the involved republics. As for now, the
town is divided into thirteen quarters: Baku, Belgorod, Kyiv, Moscow,
Riga, Tallinn, Tbilisi, Vilnius, Yerevan, Dobryn, Nevsky, Pechersk, and
Chernihiv, each has its own special architecture and style. For example,
the traditional Georgian crosses can be found in the Tbilisi quarter;
the architecture style of the Yerevan quarter is a precise replica of
the pink houses in Armenia, the Baku quarter is decorated with a
barbecue in the middle of the courtyards; the area of ​​ Slavutych is
7.5 squire kilometres and it is often called the last monument to the
Soviet Union.[^14]

**Pryp'yat' - a ghost town that attracts millions.**

A story of the inhabited town of Pryp'yat' ended with the explosion of
the Chornobyl nuclear power plant, at the same time, a story of a ghost
town Pryp'yat' began and will go on. People had never populated the town
again after the urgent evacuation. But wilderness became a ruler of the
area; vegetation grows abundantly and unhindered throughout the city,
wild animals dominate the forests of the Zone and the abandoned
buildings of the town of Pryp'yat' and other localities.

<p align="center">
<img src="/images/alex/image6.jpg" alt="drawing" style="width:600px; text-align:center;"/>
</p>

<p align="center">
<i>Source: Flickr.com, June 8, 2007</i>
</p>

However, people did not vanish completely from the town; they have been
visiting Pryp'yat' for different purposes: as tourists, as journalists,
scientists, as extreme adventurers, who call themselves *stalkers* after
a character of Andrey Tarkovski's 1979 Soviet science fiction movie
based on the novel by Arkadi and Boris Strugatsky, Roadside Picnic. In
this movie, a stalker is a person who searches for mysterious and alien
artifacts in the restricted area called the Zone.

The town became a worldwide known spot and attraction for many tourists
of different backgrounds. It seems that every youngster on the planet
knows about Pryp'yat' through videogames, where the architecture town is
replicated in precise details; due to popular music[^15] and
contemporary movies. Thousands of tourists from all over the world visit
Pryp'yat' and the Chornobyl Zone every year. From 2015 to 2018, the
number of visitors increased from 8,000 to 70,000, and half of them are
foreigners. For eight months of 2019, the Exclusion Zone was visited by
a record number of tourists -- 74,671 people.[^16]

<p align="center">
<img src="/images/alex/image7.jpg" alt="drawing" style="width:500px; text-align:center;"/>
</p>

<p align="center">
<i>Source: Alex Yemelianenko</i>
</p>


Once, I also visited the town, even before
it became mainstream to-go place. In 2011 with a group of Belarusian
journalists, we drove around the entire Zone, including the Belarusian
part of the area, where I was surprised to see booming land cultivation,
wheat fields and herds of cows only 50 kilometres away from the
Chornobyl nuclear power plant. At that moment, I caught myself thinking
that it is not surprising that there is an increasing number of
oncological diseases across Belarus. Nonetheless, I still remember my
own feelings and thoughts when we were driving and walking around empty
streets and abandoned buildings of Pryp'yat'. I do remember that feeling
of helplessness, and the fact that I was not able to get rid of the
oppressive state of mind, that at the moment I was staying at the edge
of the abyss where mankind could disappear forever; I was also comparing
my feelings when I saw the ancient pyramids

<p align="center">
<img src="/images/alex/image8.jpg" alt="drawing" style="width:600px; text-align:center;"/>
</p>

<p align="center">
<i>Source: Alex Yemelianenko</i>
</p>


![](alex/image10.jpg")in Egypt with those that I experienced in
Pryp'yat'. The feelings and emotions were extremely opposite: in Egypt,
they were positive and exciting, while in
![](alex/image11.png)Pryp'yat' emotions were horrifying and
disgusting. But, nonetheless, I definitely recommend visiting this
place; and not only in order to see what could happen with the deserted
town, but also in order to feel the full depth of misbehaviour with the
Mother Nature and nuclear energy.

**Conclusion**

In this essay I made an attempt to examine the history of a unique
socialist *atomograd* Pryp'yat'. The town with an exceptional history,
which had a short but bright story. We found out, that Pryp'yat' is well
known across the world and now serves as an attraction for tourists.
Pryp'yat' was one of many socialist towns of the USSR, with a clear
Soviet-style urban design, inhabitants of which enjoyed a prosperous
socialist life. This essay also analyzes an impact of the Chornobyl
nuclear power plant explosion on the town's further development.

<p align="center">
<img src="/images/alex/image9.jpg" alt="drawing" style="width:600px; text-align:center;"/>
</p>

<p align="center">
<i>Source: Alex Yemelianenko</i>
</p>


The essay is divided into three subtopics: the first part is about
foundation of the town in 1970 and its subsequent development; the
second section is about influence of the 1986 Chornobyl catastrophe, and
the third part is about post-catastrophe period, when the entire
population of the town was relocated into a new place, a town of
Slavutych; about the post-Soviet period of Pryp'yat', which eventually
became a ghost town, and an attraction for tourists and for so-called
*stalkers*. In this paperwork I have utilized primary and secondary
sources of different historical periods in three languages: English,
Ukrainian and Russian. In my essay, I have applied visual materials
about the town, including my personal photo-archive, as well as from
magazine articles and online sources. I believe that my work might be
interesting for broad global audience because it may simply be
unfamiliar with the precisehistory of the town and its quite interesting
past.

[^1]: Kyoko, Selden (1987). Poems by atomic bomb survivors, Bulletin of Concerned Asian Scholars, 19:2, 17-23, DOI: 10.1080/14672715.1987.10409888

[^2]:  [51 рік тому заснували Прип\'ять: Як могло виглядати місто без аварії на ЧАЕС.](https://kyiv.depo.ua/ukr/kyiv/51-rik-tomu-zasnuvali-pripyat-yak-moglo-viglyadati-misto-bez-avarii-na-chaes-202102051281069)

[^3]: [Припять: История от развития до
    забытия.](https://pripyatcity.fandom.com/ru/wiki/%D0%9F%D1%80%D0%B8%D0%BF%D1%8F%D1%82%D1%8C_:_%D0%98%D1%81%D1%82%D0%BE%D1%80%D0%B8%D1%8F_%D0%BE%D1%82_%D1%80%D0%B0%D0%B7%D0%B2%D0%B8%D1%82%D0%B8%D1%8F_%D0%B4%D0%BE_%D0%B7%D0%B0%D0%B1%D1%8B%D1%82%D0%B8%D1%8F)

[^4]: [Чернобыльская АЭС, Генеральный план
    поселка.](https://pripyat-city.ru/wp-content/uploads/2011/03/pripyat_71_general.pdf)

[^5]: [Припять: История от развития до
    забытия.](https://pripyatcity.fandom.com/ru/wiki/%D0%9F%D1%80%D0%B8%D0%BF%D1%8F%D1%82%D1%8C_:_%D0%98%D1%81%D1%82%D0%BE%D1%80%D0%B8%D1%8F_%D0%BE%D1%82_%D1%80%D0%B0%D0%B7%D0%B2%D0%B8%D1%82%D0%B8%D1%8F_%D0%B4%D0%BE_%D0%B7%D0%B0%D0%B1%D1%8B%D1%82%D0%B8%D1%8F)

[^6]: [Чорнобиль -- Прип'ять -- історія, архітектура,
    забуття.](http://repositary.knuba.edu.ua/bitstream/handle/987654321/7433/201557-492-501.pdf?sequence=1)

[^7]: Ibid.

[^8]: [Чернобыльская АЭС, Генеральный план
    поселка.](https://pripyat-city.ru/wp-content/uploads/2011/03/pripyat_71_general.pdf)

[^9]: [Чернобыльская АЭС, Генеральный план
    поселка.](https://pripyat-city.ru/wp-content/uploads/2011/03/pripyat_71_general.pdf)

[^10]:  [Сколько микрорайонов было в Припяти?](http://pripyat.com/faq/skolko-mikroraionov-bylo-v-pripyati.html)

[^11]: [The record of the original announcement sound (Soundcloud,
    n.d.).](https://soundcloud.com/kate-moria/1986-www-mixmuz-ru)

[^12]:  [Чернобыль. Мифы и факты (Tass.ru, n.d.)](https://tass.ru/spec/chernobyl)

[^13]: [Babel.ua (April 26,
    2019)](https://babel.ua/ru/texts/29390-33-goda-nazad-proizoshla-avariya-na-chernobylskoy-aes-my-publikuem-unikalnye-foto-o-zhizni-pereselencev-i-rabote-stancii-posle-katastrofy).

[^14]: [HB Life (August 19,
    2019).](https://life.nv.ua/travel/slavutich-sputnik-chernobylya-statya-cnn-travel-50038227.html)

[^15]: [NV.ua, (July 24,
    2019)](https://nv.ua/art/dub-fx-posetil-chernobyl-i-zapisal-trek-50033859.html)

[^16]: [Epravda.com.ua (Sep 6,
    2019).](https://www.epravda.com.ua/rus/news/2019/09/6/651369/)
