---
layout: post
title: The Monument to the Great Kazakh Corruption
author: Gulmira Imanova
date: Jul 3 2021 14:17
---
Every day on their way to work and returning home, hundreds of residents
of the capital of Kazakhstan, Nur-Sultan (formerly known as Astana
before 2019), pass near the enormous grey concrete-pier trestles in the
middle of the new shiny city center. They are a part of the infamous
Astana Light Rail Transportation (LRT) project stalled when its
construction has barely begun. They are hard to hide behind the fencing
because of their colossal height and scatteration along the main street
road. But people seem not to notice them. They had come to terms with
these four-meter-high ugly columns calling them ironically \"the
monument for great Kazakh corruption.\" Just like they did with the
corruption itself, which has permeated all aspects of their lives.

<p align="center">
<img src="/images/gulmira/image1.jpg" alt="drawing" style="width:600px; text-align:center;"/>
</p>

<p align="center">
<i>Source: https://politic.kz/verhi/10297-lrt-eto-kazakhstan-v-miniatiure-kogda-chinovnichii-idiotizm-podkreplen-neftedollarami</i>
</p>



**Hell is Paved with Good Intentions**

The idea of building light rail transportation was born in the mid-2000s
in anticipation of rapid population growth in the capital. In 2006, to
execute the order of President Nursultan Nazarbayev, the city akim
(mayor) Umirzak Shukeyev adopted the New Transport System of Astana
program. According to this program, it was planned to connect the new
Left Bank district with the old city by means of the ground express
tram. The construction was supposed to begin in 2008 and end two and
half years later. The estimated cost of the project was 262 million US
dollars. The European Bank of Reconstruction and Development was
identified as a possible loan source to finance the project. However,
seven akims changed since that time. The initial project changed beyond
recognition and rose ten times in cost.

In 2008, the new akim Askar Mamin proposed implementing BRT (bus rapid
transit) project instead of light rail. This initiative would cost the
city about 564 million US dollars. However, next akim Imangali
Tasmagambetov returned to the idea of LRT (light rail transportation) in
the form of the elevated viaduct. He created a specialized company,
\"Astana LRT,\" with 100% participation of the akimat (city
administration) to act as the project administrator. This time, the
government of France agreed to become the major investor committing a
570 million euro grant. French company Alstom was named the main
contractor of the first stage of the construction together with two
local companies.

In July 2011, President Nazarbayev laid the capsule in honour of the
start of the LRT construction. The new light rail route began from the
city airport to the planned tallest skyscraper in the Left Bank,
Abu-Dhabi Plaza, and the new Nurly Zhol railroad station. Its announced
cost was 2.3 billion US dollars and required additional financing
sources. In 2013, Asian Development Bank considered the project but
refused to participate in it, saying it was too expensive. Nazarbayev
ordered to find an alternative solution. Tasmagambetov remembered about
the BRT project, but this project was destined to be shelved again.

In 2014, another akim Adilbek Zhaqsybekov revived the LRT project once
again. The reasons are unclear, but this decision coincided with the
appointment of Nazarbayev\'s grandson Nurali Aliyev as the deputy mayor
of the city. He presented this project and positioned it as \"an ideal
solution for the capital eliminating the load on the traditional
transport system.\" The light-ground metro was supposed to be launched
before Astana EXPO 2017 international exposition. The overland metro
should have covered 22.4 kilometres and have 18 stations, 19 light rail
trains, and a depot in the airport area. The project was given the green
light despite its high cost. Investors too, were also found.

<p align="center">
<img src="/images/gulmira/image2.jpg" alt="drawing" style="width:600px; text-align:center;"/>
</p>

<p align="center">
<i>Source: https://clrt.kz/proekty</i>
</p>


**Chinese Factor and the \"Five Baits\"**

In 2015 Nazarbayev and Chinese President Xi Jinping signed the first
part of the EPC contract (Engineering-Procurement-Construction) and loan
agreement for financing the project. A consortium of Chinese companies
\"China Railway Asia-Europe Construction Investment Co., Ltd,\"
\"Beijing State-Owned Assets Management Co.,\" and \"China Railway No.2
Engineering Group Co., Ltd\", as well as the China State Development
Bank became active participants of LRT construction in Astana. Under the
agreement, Chinese companies must carry out work for 1.6 billion US
dollars which was 80% of the project cost. The Kazakh side must pay the
remaining 20% ​​(over 200 million US dollars).

The China Development Bank provided Chinese part of the project
financing as a loan for 20 years at an annual rate of 2.5% in exchange
for a sovereign guarantee. Such a guarantee means that all obligations
will be satisfied by the Kazakh government when and if the primary
borrower fails to fulfill his obligations. For the first time in the
history of Kazakhstan, such a guarantee was issued to back up a
quasi-governmental company -- Astana LRT. Also utterly unusual was the
fact that the China Development Bank transferred money to the Astana LRT
bank account. As a rule, the Chinese have strict control -- Chinese
money stays in Chinese companies: payments are deposited to Chinese
contractors directly.

The project was included in the Chinese grandiose international
infrastructural The Belt and Road Initiative, first announced by
President Xi in 2013 within the walls of the Nazarbayev University in
Astana. Since 2013, Nazarbayev has met 20 times with Xi Jinping
personally, not counting dozens of working visits between high-ranking
officials of two states. Every high-level meeting is accompanied by
signing a cooperation agreement snowballing Kazakhstan\'s external debt
and increasing the amount of Chinese direct investment in the country.

Chinese interests in Kazakhstan are mainly related to its transit
potential. Kazakhstan is a bridge for trade between China and Europe. To
fully benefit from Kazakhstan\'s transit potential, China is ready to
invest in the modernization of Kazakhstan\'s transport infrastructure.
China also generously provides long-term loans that help the Kazak
leadership close gaps in social spending and maintain political
stability. Asking for Chinese assistance became habitual after the 2009
financial crisis, especially later after a sharp decline in revenues due
to a steep fall of the global prices for hydrocarbons that make up to
one-third of the country\'s GDP.

In return, Chinese companies have exclusive access to acquire a
significant stake in local oil and gas and mining companies or rights to
buy Kazakhstani raw materials at well below market prices. This way,
gradually, all oil production in the Aktobe region of Kazakhstan moved
under the control of Chinese investors. More than half of the board of
directors of the Kazakhmys company, a monopoly producer of copper, gold,
zinc, nickel, chromium and aluminum in the country, are Chinese
citizens. The company received a 1.5 billion US dollars loan from the
China Development Bank to develop the Aktogay field in 2015. More than
80% of Kazakhmys products are exported to China at below-market prices.

Another significant Chinese interest is also related to Kazakhstan\'s
location. Kazakhstan borders with the troubled Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous
Region (XUAR), where the Uighur Turks live. Xinjiang has developed
separatism and religious extremism, which Beijing is trying to suppress.
Beijing needs to integrate the XUAR and reduce its ties with the
extremist groups in the entire region. To do this, he needs a stable and
secular Kazakhstan.

Chinese investments and financial assistance carry no political
implications. To get them, it is not necessary to meet democratic
standards, to maintain a certain level of human rights or freedom of
speech, which is essential for Western partners. China has a two
millennia-old \"five baits\" strategy well described in a book, *On
China*, written by Henry Kissinger, the Secretary of State under US
President Nixon. This strategy is based on corrupting their opponents to
achieve their goals:

> \"To give them elaborate clothes and carriages in order to corrupt their eyes; to give them fine food in order to corrupt their mouth; to give them music and women in order to corrupt their ears; to provide them with lofty buildings, granaries and slaves in order to corrupt their stomach ... and, as for those who come to surrender, the emperor (should) show them favor by honoring them with an imperial reception party in which the emperor should personally serve them wine and food so as to corrupt their mind. These are what may be called the five baits.\"

In February 2016, the daughter of the President, Dariga Nazarbayeva, who
then held the post of deputy prime minister of the republic, said at a
meeting of the expanded board of the Ministry of Education and Science
that China is the fate of the republic, and its citizens need to learn a
new foreign language. In the same 2016, the government made significant
changes to the country\'s land code. It was decided to sell 1.7 million
hectares of agricultural land through auctions, and foreigners could
lease land for up to 25 years. Immediately, mass protests were held
across the country where activists openly opposed selling land to China
and Chinese economic expansion in Kazakhstan. According to various
estimates, Kazakhstan\'s debt to China reached 20 billion US dollars.

In March 2016, Nurali Aliyev left the post of the deputy akim. It was
announced that LRT would not be launched till EXPO 2017. Despite this
fact and amidst anti-Chinese sentiments, in 2017, Chinese contractors
began erecting supporting concrete structures for the elevated light
rail. They planned to complete construction by December 31, 2019.

<p align="center">
<img src="/images/gulmira/image3.jpg" alt="drawing" style="width:600px; text-align:center;"/>
</p>

<p align="center">
<i>Source:
https://krisha.kz/content/news/2017/stroitel-stvo-lrt-v-astane-kak-vyglyadit-liniya-seychas</i>
</p>



**Ill-fated Project**

From the very beginning, the LRT project was accompanied by financial
scandals. In 2014, the National Anti-Corruption Bureau found that Astana
LRT transferred about 2 million US dollars to the account of one of the
contractors, exceeding the set limit two times. A year later, new
financial violations in the amount close to 50 million US dollars have
been identified. Surprisingly, no prosecution was announced.

In 2017, when construction works were about to begin, the new akim of
the capital Asset Issekeshev attempted to revise the agreement\'s main
provisions with the Chinese partners. He proposed changes in the cost of
the project, the expansion of the track gauge and the reduction of the
territory of the depot. Issekeshev first reprimanded the director of
Astana LRT, Talgat Ardan, and then dismissed him from office. A new
company, \"LRT Construction Directorate,\" was created to monitor the
construction process. Chinese contractors complained to Nazarbayev that
the new terms of the contract were unacceptable. The \"LRT Construction
Directorate\" actions were perceived as an obstacle to the start of
construction. They threatened to break the contract and apply penalties
due to the unfulfilled obligations of the previous management. At the
same time, a pre-trial investigation was launched in a criminal case
against Talgat Ardan. He was put on the international wanted list.
Nevertheless, construction began.

By April 2019, five hundred fifty-five supporting poles were finished
when the construction site had to be frozen due to the collapsed Bank of
Astana, in which \$ 257 million allocated for LRT were stuck. The
National Bank revoked the license of this bank because of its financial
problems, which is another story. As a result, 15 percent of
construction and installation works were completed. The consortium of
Chinese companies provided services for 313 million US dollars in total,
of which only 86 million US dollars were paid. Thus, the indebtedness to
Chinese contractors constituted 203 million US dollars.

In March 2019, Nazarbayev resigned. The same year, new president
Kassym-Zhomart Tokayev heavily criticized the project and ordered the
anti-corruption agency to check if Astana LRT project expenses were
reasonable. It turned out that the existing passenger traffic on a
similar route from the airport to the new railway station is 2,000
people per day, which is only one seventy of the planned LRT project
capacity of carrying 146,000 passengers daily. At this low-capacity
rate, the project would pay back in 600 years. On top of the sunk costs,
the annual maintenance costs of LRT will be 10 million US dollars from
the state budget. Critics of the project calculated that each of the
supporting columns of the Monument for corruption costs 559 thousand US
dollars. The cost of four columns equals the cost of construction of one
secondary school in Kazakhstan.

Meanwhile, Kazakhstan refused the loan from the China Development Bank
due to the high cost of the project. The number of stations was reduced
from 18 to 11, and the project\'s cost shrank to 1.5 billion US dollars.
The government of Kazakhstan is seeking alternative sources of financing
the project. To this end, Astana LRT issued bonds for 1.5 billion US
dollars. The securities worth 525 million US dollars have been offered
at the Astana International Exchange. The People\'s Bank of Kazakhstan
purchased these securities for 400 million US dollars after selling 5
percent of its shares on the market. The remaining bonds were offered to
Baiterek National Management Holding, which includes all
Kazakhstan-based development institutions such as the Development Bank
of Kazakhstan, the Investment Fund of Kazakhstan, etc. The loan of the
China Development Bank of 343 million US dollars was fully repaid out of
420 million US dollars received after the placement of bonds.

Two of three Chinese contractors remained. One of the three Chinese
companies in the project contractors\' consortium, to which the
Kazakhstan party had claims regarding the quality of works, was replaced
with the Kazakhstan-based Integra Construction (former Zhol Zhondeushi,
a subsidiary of ENRC Logistics). It was announced that the construction
of LRT would be completed by 2023. The country can not withdraw from the
project as the penalties are enormous. New akim Altai Kulginov never
dared to name the amount, only referring to the fact that international
arbitrage would entail considerable costs. Moreover, the reputation of
the country as a reliable borrower and partner is at risk.

<p align="center">
<img src="/images/gulmira/image4.jpg" alt="drawing" style="width:600px; text-align:center;"/>
</p>

<p align="center">
<i>Source:
<https://tengrinews.kz/kazakhstan_news/delo-lrt-nazvanyi-shemyi-hischeniya-deneg-381213</i>
</p>


**The Show Must Go On**

In October 2020, the Nur-Sultan court began to consider the case of
embezzlement in Astana LRT. The investigation revealed the fraud scheme
organized by earlier mentioned Talgat Ardan and Kanat Sultanbekov, who
served as deputy akim of Astana in 2009-2014. Both of them escaped the
country. The reported damage to the state budget is about 13 million US
dollars. The fraud also involved several mid-tier officials who approved
the overestimated LRT construction costs.

Less than a month ago, in May 2021, this scandalous case was over.
Everyone knows how business is done in Kazakhstan. Thus, nobody is
surprised about the outcomes of the high-profile trial on embezzlement
of public funds accompanied the project on construction of Astana LRT.
Seven scapegoats have been sentenced to up to ten years in jail, while
the main organizers who know too much escaped the country. The
investigation is accused to be conducted superficially and the trial was
held with numerous procedural inconsistencies.

At the end of the day, the mid-tier officials and a handful of business
representatives were held accountable in this case. Primary
beneficiaries from the mightiest Kazakh family and their accomplices
remain above the law and out of reach. International consulting firms
from the USA, UK, France, Spain and Turkey who participated in the grand
scam and in fact, helped steal the funds have been excluded from the
list of defendants in this case. Their reputation remains clean. Chinese
financial institutions that funded the project received their money back
at the expense of future Kazakh generations. Chinese contractors are
well protected by the EPC contract terms with enormous penalties if the
Kazakh side fails to fulfil its obligations.

Hundred million dollars have already been buried in construction so far.
The project is obviously not cost-effective. Instead of admitting the
mistakes and refusing the project, the authorities announced that the
project would be finished to save face. Most probably, it will be done
at the expense of 1.2 billion of budgetary money. The project was
re-branded, and now it is called City Transportation Systems (CTS). Life
in the country goes on as usual. Only gloomy supporting elements of LRT
have been left like a scar on the face of Nur-Sultan.

The question is now whether the capital needs this costly mode of
transportation after all? Unfortunately, nobody is concerned about
holding public hearings to discuss this question. Nobody asks the people
who pass the monument for grand Kazakh corruption on their way to work
and back home. People also do not ask questions as long as they have a
home and work.